README
Project 3A
CMSC 14400
Autumn 2024

=== PROJECT 3A IS DUE SUNDAY, NOV 9, 2025 AT 11:59pm ===

Project 3A consists of implementing operations in a simple
computer-in-software designed as shown in project3a.h. Before writing
any code, it's a good idea to read the data structure definitions
carefully to see how the machine is constructed in software.

The Project 3A machine has an 8-bit address space. As such, it has 256
bytes of memory. There are 8 1-byte registers on the CPU. The 3A
machine has a cache of four sets of two lines each. Each cache line
has a valid bit, a 4-bit tag, and a 4-byte block. In a given address,
the first four bits (the more significant four) are the tag bits, the
next two bits are the set bits, and the last two bits (the least
significant) are the block offset bits.

=== MACHINE INSTRUCTIONS

The two instructions that are supported by the 3A machine are

  movb op1 op2

and

  addb op1 op2.

Each operand (op1, op2) is either an immediate (a constant), a
register, or an address in memory. Immediates are decimal numbers with
a $ prefix: they are written $0, $1, $2, etc. Registers are written
r0, r1, and so on up to r7. Addresses in memory are decimal numbers on
the interval [0,255] without any prefix.

For example, the instruction "movb r4 122" means "move the contents of
register 4 to memory location 122."

The instructions only work on certain operand combinations, as follows:

movb immediate immediate -- this doesn't make sense and is not supported
movb immediate register  -- supported
movb immediate memory    -- supported
movb register  immediate -- (nonsense) not supported
movb register  register  -- supported
movb register  memory    -- supported
movb memory    immediate -- (nonsense) not supported
movb memory    register  -- supported
movb memory    memory    -- not supported (cannot be done directly)

For addb, the same combinations are either supported or not supported
as indicated above. The addb instruction is a += style addition such
that the second operand is increased by the given source. For example,
the instruction "addb $25 r0" should result in the value in r0 having
been increased by (decimal) 25.

Any arithmetic done in the 3A machine (and this pertains to the
magical instructions below as well) should be modulo 256; bytes are
all you have, so any computational result must fit in a byte.

Any instruction that reads from memory should look in cache first. If
the data is not in the cache, load the four bytes around the desired
byte into a cache line and then read from the cache. The phrase "the
four bytes around the desired byte" means the four bytes whose
addresses are 0, 1, 2, and 3 modulo 4 containing the byte of
interest. For example, for address 10, these are addresses 8, 9, 10
and 11. This is the very same group of four addresses for bytes 8, 9,
and 11 as well.

When drawing a four-byte block from memory into the cache, populate an
empty line if there is one; otherwise, evict a cache line of your
choice (there is no specified eviction policy) and replace it with the
fresh data.

Instructions that write to memory should write to memory and also any
cached version of that part of memory. Cache data and memory data must
be kept consistent. There should never by other than a momentary
difference between cache data and memory data; they must remain
consistent. This kind of writing regime is known as "write-through"
(as opposed to "write-back", where the cache is allowed to get out of
sync with memory).

In the implementation of movb and addb, your code should track how
many clock cycles have elapsed along the way. Operations that involve
only moving data between registers require only one clock cycle. If
registers and the cache are involved, but not memory, five cycles are
needed. If memory is involved, two hundred cycles are
required. Therefore, after each operation, make sure to increase the
machine's clock cycle counter by 1, 5, or 200 accordingly.

If the user gives a nonsense instruction like "movb $5 $6", your
program should simply ignore it (and print a message if you are so
inclined).

=== MAGICAL INSTRUCTIONS

The following magical instructions populate memory with interesting
values to assist in testing. Because they are magical, they cost
nothing on the clock. The three instructions are .fill, .set, and
.scale.

The .fill instruction takes two operands: a memory address and an
immediate. It should fill memory starting at the given address with
the given immediate, increasing by 1 per memory location and going all
the way up to memory address 255.

The .set instruction takes two operands: a memory address and an
immediate. It should fill memory starting at the given address with
the given immediate up to address 255. It does not increase like
.fill; it writes the same value everywhere.

The .scale instruction takes two operands: a memory address and an
immediate, a scalar. It should multiply every item in memory, starting
at the given address and up to 255, by the scalar.

If the user types a nonsense magical instruction like ".fill $5 $6",
your program should simply ignore it (and print a message if you are
so inclined).

=== RESETTING THE MACHINE

The zero_machine function should zero out the whole machine, including
the clock cycle counter, for an entirely fresh start.

=== HELPER FUNCTIONS

Implementation of Project 3A can be made much easier and more pleasant
given a good selection of well-chosen helper functions. You don't need
to design them all right from the outset; try writing some code and
see what parts of it you find yourself needing repeatedly. To
familiarize yourself with the landscape of this project, we suggest
you start by writing zero_machine and implementing the magical
instructions.
